---
title: Start
author: Tyler Law
date: 2021-01-31
category: Basic
layout: post
---

**Process:**

-   Find a trusted realtor through Dave Ramsey's website, word of mouth,
    connections at church, etc.

-   Talk to a mortgage lender to get pre-approved for a loan on the home

    -   This involves collecting things like prior tax returns, pay
        stubs, 401(k) statements, ROTH-IRA statements, credit score,
        etc.

    -   The goal of this step is to figure out how much home you can
        afford

        -   As a reference, Dave Ramsey says no more than 25% of
            take-home income (income net of taxes) on principal,
            interest, taxes, and insurance on a 15-year mortgage

-   Once you know how much you can afford, start simultaneously

    -   Looking at homes/condos both online (via. Zillow, redfin, your
        realtor, etc.) and in person

        -   Looking at homes in person with people who have bought many
            homes before is strongly recommended, especially if this is
            your first time purchasing one

    -   Considering what kind of home that you'd like to have given the
        current market: ranch, multiple stories, split-level, open floor
        plan, long-term home with space for many kids, short-term
        starter home, location, school districts, taxes, etc.

        -   Decide on things that are a need (e.g. location, location,
            location, home vs. condo, need to have 3 bedrooms and 2.5
            bathrooms, 2 car garage, big backyard, etc.) versus things
            that are wants (e.g. master on main floor, finished
            basement, open floor plan, etc.).

        -   This is probably the most difficult part of the process and
            will likely change multiple times through the process

    -   If you can afford it, it could be nice to consider building a
        home as well as looking at older homes for sale. You can explore
        the process of building a home (which can take months) while
        continuing to look at older homes for sale

    -   The goal of this is to find what kind of home you want and being
        ready to buy

        -   From Algorithms to live by, you should decide on how long
            you want to spend on the whole process, look for homes for
            2/3 the time without any goal of commitment. After the 2/3
            time is up, you should move on anything that you find that
            is as good or better than the homes you saw in the first 2/3
            of your search

-   Making an offer on a home

    -   An offer includes amount of money for the house and
        contingencies like waving request to remedy, contingent on the
        inspection of the house, appraisal gap, paying for closing
        costs, putting a deadline on the offer, including an offer
        letter, dollars in earnest

        -   The need for these will change based on the market. Work
            with your realtor on deciding what makes a strong and
            appropriate offer in your market

        -   Waiving Request to Remedy is telling them we are not going
            to ask the seller to fix anything. That doesn't mean you
            can't get of the contract. It doesn't mean you can't ask
            them to fix major repairs that they would have to disclose.
            The main reason for inspections is health and safety of the
            home. If there was something that was found to be unhealthy
            or not safe after inspection (that was not previously
            disclosed) we could go and ask them to fix it. They have to
            the right to say no, but we can still negotiate and try to
            work something out. If we waive request to remedy, you won't
            ask them to fix a broken dishwasher or a lock that doesn't
            operate well. Essentially minor things

        -   Appraisal gap is saying that we will fill the gap between
            the appraisal and the offer price if the appraisal comes in
            under the offer

            -   This is needed since the bank will only approve a
                mortgage up to the appraisal amount

-   Once offer is accepted, you are in contract and the home is
    contingent

-   The next step is to have the home inspected; work with your realtor
    to find a good inspector or find one from others via. word of mouth

-   You will work through your broker to negotiate things like getting
    them to pay for certain broken things in the home, especially
    structural/health issues. You may need to call in specialists (roof
    specialist, pool specialist, fireplace specialist, chimney
    specialist, etc.) to appropriately price fixing different issues in
    the home

-   If things come up from inspections or you are unable to reach a deal
    through our negotiations, you can walk away anytime having only lost
    the cost of the inspection, the cost of experts coming out to give
    estimates on costs to fix things, etc.

-   Next you will have the home appraised so that the bank can approve
    the mortgage

-   After negotiations, you close on the house, pay the costs and fees
    necessary, and it's yours

-   Purchase a warranty for your home. There are different warranties
    that you can purchase when you get your home

    -   American home warranty is insurance for big items that break in
        the first year; this can be renewed each year if you wish

    -   ***[There may be something like 30-year new home warranty
        too?]{.ul}***

**Questions to ask your realtor about each prospective home**

-   Is it worth the money?

-   How can I make my offer competitive?

-   What other riders/clauses should I include in it?

**Mortgage Information**

-   Mortgage Call with Peggy Halbrook 12/3/2020

    -   You skip one month of mortgage payments after you close.
        Specifically, if you close in March, we skip the April mortgage
        payment and make our first mortgage payment in May

    -   Pre-approval is free and lasts 120 days

    -   Pre-approval application requires a hard inquiry into your
        credit score, which will knock it down, but this is removed from
        your credit scores in 90 days

        -   This is true for credit cards too

    -   90% of the interest rate and approval amount depends on this
        credit score

    -   If cannot pay full 20% down, mortgage insurance is required.
        This is impacted by my debt ratio, which is calculated as

        -   $DebtRatio = \ \frac{Total\ Monthly\ Payment + Minimum\ Payments\ for\ Other\ Credit\ Amounts}{\text{Gross\ Monthly\ Combined\ Income}}$

        -   If this debt ratio is less than 43%, this will give you the
            best mortgage insurance rate. There is no benefit from going
            from 43% to say 20% since the rate will not be any better

    -   Ohio is a dower state, which means that spouses will be on the
        title and have rights to the home even if spouses are not on the
        loan; this means that you should use the credit score of the
        spouse with the highest credit score for the loan, and the other
        spouse will still be on the title

    -   There are first time homebuyer perks for less mortgage
        insurance, and these are only available for people who make less
        than \~\$60K per year

    -   There are down payment assistance programs for those with higher
        income than \$60K per year, but these increase closing costs by
        \~\$1k and require a higher interest rate

**Tips for New Build**

-   Confirm the size of the yard; usually they are small in new builds

-   Confirm the space between homes side by side

-   Confirm the thread count for the carpets

    -   Usually, 60 thread count for bedroom since there's less foot
        traffic and 80 thread count for living space

-   The only things that are worth having the construction company do
    for extra cost are things that last a very long time and are more
    structural (counter tops, cabinets, basement finishing)

    -   Do not have them do light fixtures, window covering, or things
        of the like; these are their highest profit margin items

-   What is the monthly payment including taxes, insurance, PMI, HOA,
    etc.?

-   What kind of landscaping is included, if any?

-   What appliances are included?

-   What is the quality of the base materials; is this apartment grade?

-   What kind of warranties come with this new home?

-   How much earnest money is put down and when?

-   See the home many times as it's being built. Mistakes happen, and
    the sooner you get them the better

**Advice from other homebuyers**

-   You don't have to do every home project at once; take your time with
    what you'd like to do and don't let the mound of projects overwhelm
    you

-   Check that the basement is dry!

-   Look at the auditor's website for recent home purchases to compare
    potential home purchase with recent purchase activity

-   Columbus, Ohio places to refinance or finance

    -   Union square bank -- ask for Joe Loudenslager

        -   You can refinance your home with closing costs as little as
            \$400

    -   Third street bank

-   Find what things you want to fix in your home over the next three
    years and set a budget for doing them. It will likely be much more
    expensive than you think it will be

-   Use garage sales, Facebook marketplace, estate sales, etc. for
    furnishing the new home

-   Look into purchasing a generator if the home does not have one in
    case of power outages

-   STAY AWAY FROM FREEWAYS AND BUSY ROADWAYS because of Road noise when
    windows open or backyard activity and property value and resale

-   On corner lot houses - Sidewalk maintenance if something should
    damage sidewalk such as roots or severe cracking you are responsible
    for repair.  Snow removal city ordinance. Traffic noise if a busy
    neighborhood

-   When selling an existing home to buy a new home, fill out a 1035 tax
    form for property exchanges so that you aren't taxed on capital
    gains

-   Know that there are a lot of costs that come with a home that are
    not accounted for when renting such as

    -   Outside:

        -   Lawn Mower (\$100 to \$300) or Lawns service

        -   Gas can for Mower

        -   Rakes, hoes, shovels, etc. for dirt

        -   Snow shovels or blower if big driveway and walks

        -   Garden tools for plants and flowers

        -   Fertilizer for plants and grass

        -   Fertilizer spreader or lawn service

        -   Garden hoses

        -   Work gloves

        -   Outside Trash Bags for leaves and trimmings

        -   Trash Container for outside

    -   Garage:

        -   Brooms

        -   Dustpan

        -   Shelving or cupboards for storing various items

        -   Nice to have a workbench at least down the road

        -   Shop Vacuum Wet and Dry capable dry and water spill / small
            flooded area

    -   Indoors:

        -   Drapes / window coverings

        -   Washer / Dryer

-   Check the door quality: are they hollow or full doors

**FAQ:**

-   What are big ticket items to be looking out for in homes?

    -   Boiler, A/C, roof, HVAC, anything structural

-   Why do home details online include whether the home was built before
    1978 or not?

    -   Any home built before 1978 has to have lead-based paint
        disclaimer. Homes built before 78 used lead-based paint. This is
        more of a disclaimer since it's usually not an issue; plus the
        seller has to disclose if they are aware of LBP.

-   What does poured versus block basement mean?

    -   Poured foundation usually means that the basement walls are
        poured concrete and the walls are not Cinder / Cement Block. 
        Cement block has voids and can easily leak moisture and is a
        race way for termites. Usually they will have some vertical
        rebar inside the void maybe every three or four feet and where
        the rebar is the void is filled with concrete.  Placement of
        rebar and filling of voids is a city/ county building code
        requirement.  I like poured versus block. - Umpa

-   Vinyl siding versus other sidings?

    -   Vinyl I do not know a lot about this type of siding it wears
        well from what little I have read.  Extreme heat may cause some
        warping (twist) it is usually used in covering other type of
        existing siding to provide aa fresh appearance. We had steel
        siding placed on our hone on Mesa Vista. One should read up on
        it if they are considering buying a home with this type of
        siding and look at pro and con and not the owner or realtor. --
        Umpa

-   Should I use my ROTH-IRA for a down payment?

    -   <https://www.nerdwallet.com/article/investing/cautious-raiding-roth-ira-buy-home>

    -   Note that any traditional IRA contributions that you've rolled
        into a ROTH-IRA are considered "converted funds" and are not
        available for immediate withdrawal; they are subject to the 10%
        early withdrawal penalty unless they are held in the ROTH-IRA
        for 5 years or unless you are using it for your 1^st^ time home
        purchase.

        -   <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/backdoor-roth-ira.asp#citation-5>

        -   <https://www.hrblock.com/tax-center/irs/tax-responsibilities/early-withdrawal-penalties/#:~:text=Roth%20IRA%20Early%20Withdrawal%20Penalty%20%26%20Converted%20Amounts&text=If%20you%20withdraw%20contributions%20before,on%20the%20amount%20you%20converted>.
